# AVL Tree and Red Black Tree automatically balances itself

1. A binary search tree is balanced if any two sibling subtrees do not differ in height by more than one level. In other words, any two leaves should not have a difference in depth that is more than one level.

2. The height of a tree is the number of nodes on the longest path from the root node to a leaf.

3. In a height-balanced tree, no single leaf should have a significantly longer path from the root node than any other leaf on the tree.

4. The logic for how AVL arranged those nodes stems from the balancing formula that every AVL tree will adhere to: if the subtrees of a node has heights h1 and h2, then the absolute value of the difference of those two heights must be less than or equal to (≤) 1. In other words, the difference between the heights of two subtrees in an AVL tree should never exceed 1 level.

5. The idea of “never exceeding 1 level” of height difference between two subtrees is also known as the balance factor. The balance factor is the difference in heights of its two subtrees.

6. When it comes to AVL trees, there are two main types of rotations to use in order to rearrange nodes in a tree and do the hard work of self-balancing: single rotations and double rotations.

7. Single rotations are by far the simplest way to rebalance an unbalanced tree. There are two types of single rotations: a left rotation and a right rotation. A left rotation is useful if a node is inserted into the right subtree of another, higher up node’s right subtree, and that insertion or a deletion causes a tree to become unbalanced.
